---
layout: fr
title: Riot 1.0
---

{% include guide-tabs.html %}

### **IMPORTANT** Cette version n'est plus maintenue

## Introduction à Riot 1.0

Riot est l'approche la plus minimale possible au monde du MVC. La bibliothèque pèse 1ko et a seulement 3 méthodes publiques, ce qui le rend extrêmement simple à apprendre. Une application Riot utilise du JavaScript vanilla pour structurer le code. Vous utiliserez des schémas de conception classiques au lieu d'idiomes spécifiques à certains frameworks.

Les applications Riot sont modulaires et peuvent être maintenues par de multiples développeurs. Sa nature [anti-framework](https://muut.com//blog/technology/frameworkless-javascript.html) vous force à vous concentrer sur le plus important: votre logique métier et l'API.

Pour une introduction plus approfondie, consultez le [post d'origine sur le blog](https://muut.com//blog/technology/riotjs-the-1kb-mvp-framework.html).


## Qu'est-ce qui est modulaire ?

Votre rôle est de construire des applications pouvant être décomposées en modules. Chaque module s'occupe d'une certaine fonction logique et n'est pas dépendant des autres modules. Cela apporte de gros avantages:

1. Un gros programme peut être cassé en plus petites et plus simples unités
2. Les modules peuvent être ajoutés/retirés/modifiés sans affecter les autres parties de l'application
3. Plusieurs programmeurs peuvent travailler sur des modules individuels en même temps
4. La structure du programme est simple à comprendre même pour les nouveaux venus
5. La capacité à construire un sous-ensemble de modules pour des besoins différents

La modularité est l'élément clé pour les applications de grande échelle. Fondamentalement, une application modulaire consiste en deux choses:

1. un noyau (Core)
2. des modules

Le noyau de l'application est un bout de logiciel avec une API bien documentée. Il ne s'agit pas juste d'une couche données, comme vous pouvez le voir sur certaines installations MVC – il s'agit de la précieuse logique métier.

Les modules sont les extensions à ce noyau. Ces modules sont "faiblement couplés", ce qui signifie qu'ils viennent se greffer au noyau en observant les événements émis par celui-ci. Ainsi, le noyau n'a pas connaissance de ces modules.

Il n'y a pas de références à des fonctions écrites en dur car le couplage fort fonctionne mal à plus grande échelle. Il peut y avoir des dépendances déclarées en dur dans le noyau, mais pas entre le noyau et les modules.

Garder les choses modulaires implique en fait une constante organisation du travail. Chaque chose doit être à sa place la plus logique. Faites l'analogie avec les calques dans Photoshop, la table des matières dans un livre ou la hiérarchie visuelle dans une interface utilisateur. C'est une recherche permanente d'équilibre. Et quand vous ajoutez des fonctionnalités, elles doivent trouver leur place dans le cadre.


## Modèle, Vue, et Présentation

Quand on parle de modularité dans des applications mono-page, mieux vaut mettre les choses à plat.

Avant tout, vous devez connaître les objectifs de votre application. Qu'est-ce que ça fait et qu'est-ce que ça ne fait pas ? Vous modélisez votre logique métier en JavaScript: c'est votre noyau applicatif. Aussi appelé *Modèle*.

Ensuite, vous avez le navigateur et l'interface utilisateur. Le HTML, le document (DOM) et le style (CSS). La partie que l'utilisateur voit et interagit avec. C'est la *Vue*.

Puis vous devez relier ces deux choses ensemble. Vous devez réagir aux événements survenant sur la Vue: clics, touches pressées, défilements... Vous devez aussi observer les changements du Modèle: peut-être qu'une nouvelle entrée est venue d'un canal temps réel, ou que quelqu'un a commenté un article. Ce composant doit observer tous ces événements et y réagir en conséquence.

Cet "entremetteur" constitue la couche dite de *Présentation*.

Riot utilise ces termes pour décrire Riot dans son ensemble: Modèle, Vue et Présentation (MVP).

Le MVP a comme objectif essentiel de séparer la logique applicative (Modèle) de l'interface utilisateur (Vue). Cette séparation est importante car elle simplifie votre code et le rend plus facilement testable. Ce manque de séparation à haut niveau cause ce qu'on appelle le "code spaghetti" où le métier et l'interface utilisateur sont mélangés entre eux. C'est l'ère jQuery avant que les applications mono-page aient commencé à gagner en popularité.

Dans la terminologie classique UI, Riot utilise la branche *Vue passive* [(1)](#links) de la famille MVP.

> L'approche Vue Passive réduit la logique comportementale des composants d'interface à son minimum en utilisant un contrôleur qui en plus de réagir aux événements utilisateur, se charge également de mettre à jour toute la vue.

Contrairement à la plupart des configurations MVC, la Vue Passive permet de n'avoir aucune dépendance entre la Vue et le Modèle. C'est un modèle de conception simple à comprendre et à implémenter – ce qui vous rend finalement plus performant.

Enfin, il est important de réaliser que MVP (ou MVC) n'est pas un framework. C'est un schéma de conception à haut niveau. Son but est de simplifier l'achitecture des applications aux interfaces chargées. C'est un moyen simple de structurer vitre code. Dans des applications à couplage faible, les modules communiquement les uns avec les autres avec des événements.

La plupart des frameworks actuels sont superflus car fondamentalement, tout ce dont vous avez besoin est un bon système d'événements.


## Model

Model is the application core. It's the most important part of your application, since everything is built on top of it. It's the public interface to the rest of the world. You'll be using it, your team will be using it, and 3rd parties are using it.

A well designed application core can be extended with loosely coupled modules and allows anyone to develop the system on their own.

In Riot the model is a complete application and not just a helper object for the presenter layer as you might have seen on MVC configurations. It's also a good practice to keep your Models fat since the closer you come to the view the harder it becomes to test the assets. Anything that is difficult to test should have minimal behavior.

This allows multiple different user interfaces to be built on top of the same Model. Think different Twitter clients for example (back when things were fine with them). People could develop wildly different experiences on top of the same API without knowing about each other.


### Designing the Model

Model is the starting point of the application design (View is another, depending on preference). You should reserve time for designing the Model and make it as simple as possible because you'll be spending lot of time with it later. Set the bar high. Think jQuery API for example.

Two things to keep in mind:

1. What problem does the product solve?
2. Who is using the product?

Model is a domain specific thing. Think what your application does, what are the goals, what features are there, and what features are *not* there. Breaking your business into logical pieces and thinking how they communicate. Something you may have done with object oriented languages in the past.

Keep these in mind when designing the properties, methods and events. Not going to go deeper here, but the API is the root of all good or evil.


### Backend

Riot does not include a separate backend component. This is by design. REST dominates the current way of thinking, but Web Sockets and realtime patterns are just around the corner, where RPC-style protocols make more sense.

Your backend interface can just have a generic `call` method so that the underlying implementation can change. Be it REST, RPC, or a custom AJAX based thing.


## View

The view is what the user sees and interacts with. The HTML page on a web browser. What's actually interesting for a JavaScript developer is the document object model (DOM). You can do all kinds of creative tricks to build user experiences. Most importantly it's a source of events:

1. User events: click, scroll, keypress, mousemove etc.
2. Document's ready event
3. URL change events

These events are in special interest for Presenters, which perform the actual manipulation of the view. The view itself has no logic – just plain old HTML and CSS code.


## Presenter

Presenter is the important middleman between the View and Model. Each presenter is a loosely-coupled module performing a discrete function and can be developed individually.

Presenter listens to the View events and calls the appropriate methods on the API. It also listens to the Model events and manipulates the DOM accordingly.

Presenter doesn't make any assertions about the business model.

<small>
Note that other frameworks may call this layer a "view", but in MVP this is called the "presenter".
</small>

### Templating

Sometimes I like to start developing a single-page application with just HTML and CSS only. It's amazing how much you can do with those. You can fine tune the design and user interface to a nearly complete state. By adding simple CSS class name switches with JavaScript you can even make those beautifully animated view switches. In reality, of course you cannot keep your hands out of JavaScript but it's totally possible to show the customer a complete application UI without single line of the actual logic.

The best thing is that you can naturally continue from that HTML view to complete the whole application. Ideally you have also completed the API so you only need to write the presenters to hook these two together.

This HTML mockup is your collection of templates. Before starting with the presenters you can move some of the HTML inside `<template/>` or `<script type='text/template'/>` tags, typically the ones that are rendered multiple times inside loops.


#### No logic

Riot takes a strong position on not recommending logic inside the templates. There are multiple reasons for this:

1. Pure HTML is cleaner and passes W3C validator. A HTML mixed with a template syntax is messy.

1. HTML is not inherently meant to describe logic

1. Template loops are unnecessary in realtime applications where the iterateable lists change over time. This must be the hardest challenge for the current template languages.

1. Logic inside HTML is hard or impossible to test

1. Logicless templates are sometimes an order of a magnitude faster, especially on non-webkit browsers [(2)](#links)

1. In complex loops it's natural to leave the data calculation logic for JavaScript and keep the templates clean.

Look for the logic on the [customer listing](https://github.com/riot/riot-admin/blob/master/src/ui/customers.js#L21). The single template is rendered multiple times on a loop and the `width` property is calculated with JavaScript and the [template](https://github.com/riot/riot-admin/blob/master/index.html#L100) remains simple.


### Routing

The demo application performs routing on the presenter layer as follows:

``` javascript
// 1. Links
app.root.on("click", "[href^='#/']", function(e) {
  riot.route($(this).attr("href"))
})


// 2. Routing (Mapping between URL and API method)
riot.route(function(path) {
  app.load(path.slice(2))
})


// 3. UI logic
app.on("before:load", function() {

  // remove existing class
  $(".page.is-active").removeClass("is-active")

}).on("load", function(view) {

  // set a new one
  $("#" + view.type + "-page").addClass("is-active")

})
```

Here's how it works:

1. **Links**: Select links that perform view switching and the change of the URL. We use jQuery's delegated events to lazily pick all anchor links from the page, even if they are dynamically created in the future.

2. **Routing**: Defines the API method to be called when URL changes. The demo application API has only one, generic `load` method that takes a page name as the argument, but you can have more complex mapping between URL's and methods.

3. **UI logic**: Defines what happens in the UI when the API method is called and data (or "page") is returned from the server. Here we assign an "is-active" CSS class name to do the animated page switch using CSS transitions.

The API emits "before:load" and "load" events so the presenters can implement the page swithing logic inside event handlers. This way you can call the `load` API method from the console too, and the UI behaves similarly as it would work by clicking the navigational links.

Routing is one of the main things that defines a client-side framework. In Riot the `riot.route` behaviour is just a thin layer above the API to deal with the back button. The API can focus on the business logic only unaware of the web layer. The routing on the presenter is completely transparent and each of the steps can be customized based on your application needs.

The above code only handles the switch and the actual rendering of the returned view object is dealt by a different, view specific presenter.


### jQuery

jQuery exists because the vanilla DOM is a complete disaster to work with. jQuery does a massive cleanup by exposing the DOM for the page developer in an elegant and friendly way.

There are other implementations [(3)](#links) too, but the real credits go to John Resig. He designed the API, which has become a standard.

Feel free to use any of the implementations, but the advantages of using jQuery itself are:

- best cross browser support, including IE6
- performance optimized selectors and internal logic
- biggest test suite, most reliable
- likely already present on a website, possibly cached from a CDN

jQuery is currently found on 58% of all websites and 93.0% of all the websites whose JavaScript library is known [(4)](#links). These numbers are growing all the time.

jQuery API is a perfect match for Riot. It's an ultimate tool for building presenters. The jQuery selectors provide an unobtrusive way to bind the model to the view. And there can be multiple presenters dealing with the same set of HTML elements unaware of each other.

Id's and class names provide a natural mechanism to hook functionality, just like you can hook styling with CSS. Just remember that if the class names and ids change you need to update the presenters too.

<small>
Note that Riot is not dependent on jQuery. You can use other DOM libraries too such as DOJO or Mootools or you can go with Facebook React.
</small>

## Module interface

Now let's focus on coding. We want a simple way to extend the application core with modules. Here's a nice `riot.observable` trick to split the application into loosely-coupled modules:


``` javascript
// make it work on client and server
var global = is_node ? exports : window,
  instance

// only single global variable is exposed
global.admin = riot.observable(function(arg) {

  // when called without argument, the API is returned
  if (!arg) return instance

  // function argument --> bind a new module
  if ($.isFunction(arg)) {
    admin.on("ready", arg)

  // configuration argument --> start the applicaiont
  } else {
    instance = new Admin(arg)

    instance.on("ready", function() {
      admin.trigger("ready", instance)
    })

  }

})
```

The above code exposes a single global variable `admin` that can be used as follows:

``` javascript
admin(function(api) {
  // module #1 logic, API is given as argument
})

admin(function(api) {
  // module #2 logic
})
```

All UI functionality on the demo application is wrapped inside modules like this. Now after you have all the code inside the modules you need to launch the application:


``` javascript
admin({ page: location.hash.slice(2), root: $("body") })
```

This will start the application with the configuration given on the argument and all the modules are initialized when the "ready" event is fired. This is typically called after the DOM has been loaded on the bottom of the page or inside jQuery's `document.ready`. The given argument typically contains the initial path of the application, as well as the root element. Your application has its own set of configuration variables, of course.

You can access the API after the initialization as follows:

``` javascript
var api = admin() // get access

api.load("customers") // call an API method, also try with "stats" for example
```

Try that on the JavaScript console on the demo (must be logged in)! All features that you can do with the UI are also available on the API. This is ensured by the strict separation of API and presenter modules.

Now your application is nicely split into decoupled modules and there is a simple way to add new modules. Each of your team members has only one, global `admin` method to use and the API is given as the first argument to each module. The modules are isolated and can be freely added / removed without breaking other parts of the application. You can have modules on both the API layer and the presenter layer.

Finally, the module interface is "white labeled". You can name the crucial module interface after your application and there is no 3rd party framework to force the naming scheme. Much cooler!


## Application lifecycle

When the application starts a sequence of events happen. Here is a typical flow:

1. The call to server is made to load the initial view data
2. The API is fully constructed
3. The modules are initialized
4. A "load" event is fired with the returned initial data

An application that requires authentication needs an extra step to handle unsuccessful logins.

Now let's look at the code:

``` javascript
// 1. load initial data from server
backend.call("init", conf.page).always(function(data) {

  // 2. construct API, we only create a User object on this demo
  self.user = new User(self, data ? data.user : {}, backend)

  // 3. all ready --> modules are loaded
  self.trigger("ready")

// init was successful
}).done(function(data) {

  // 4. load event
  self.trigger("load", data.view)

// init failed
}).fail(function() {

  // listen once when user logs in
  self.user.one("login", function(data) {
    $.extend(self.user, data.user)

    // 4b. fire a load event after successful login
    self.trigger("load", data.view)

  })

})
```

Application bootstrapping with user login is actually quite a complex thing to do, but the above flow is quite readable.


## API

Riot API is 3 things: an event library, a templating engine and a routing system.


### Events
Riot event system is in many ways similar to jQuery but there are 2 significant differences:

1) There is no [Event object](http://api.jquery.com/category/events/event-object/) because it's not relevant outside the DOM.

2) You can trigger and receive event arguments without wrapping them to an array.

#### riot.observable(el)

Adds an [Observer](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Observer_pattern) support for the given object. After this the object is able to trigger and listen to events. For example:

``` js
function Car() {

  // Make Car instances observable
  var self = riot.observable(this)

  // listen to "start" event
  self.on("start", function() {
    // engine started
  })
}

// make a new Car instance
var car = new Car()

// trigger "start" event
car.trigger("start")
```


#### el.on(events, callback)

Listen to the given space separated list of `events` and execute the `callback` each time an event is triggered.

``` js
// listen to single event
el.on("start", function() {

})

// listen to multiple events, the event type is given as the argument
el.on("start stop", function(type) {

  // type is either "start" or "stop"

})
```


#### el.one(event, callback)

Listen to the given `event` and execute the `callback` at most once.

``` js
// run the function once, even if "start" is triggered multiple times
el.one("start", function() {

})
```

#### el.off(events)

Removes the given space separated list of event listeners

``` js
el.off("start stop")
```

#### el.off(event, fn)

Removes the given callback from the event array

``` js
function doStart() {
  console.info("starting")
}

el.on("start", doStart)

// remove a specific listener
el.off("start", doStart)
```



#### el.trigger(event)

Execute all callback functions that listen to the given `event`

``` js
el.trigger("start")
```

#### el.trigger(event, arg1 ... argN)

Execute all callback functions that listen to the given `event`. Any number of extra parameters can be provided for the listeners.

``` js
// listen to "start" event and expect extra arguments
el.on("start", function(engine_details, is_rainy_day) {

})

// trigger start event with extra parameters
el.trigger("start", { fuel: 89 }, true)

```


### Templating

Riot has an [exceptionally fast](../#templating) templating system to take your HTML markup and populating them with application data.

#### riot.render(template, data)

Take the `template` and return a string where all tokens (labels wrapped with curly braces) are replaced with the given `data`. For example


``` javascript
// simple render
riot.render("<h1>Hello {name}</h1>", { name: 'John' })

// render nested objects
riot.render("<h1>Hello {user.name}/h1>", { user: { name: 'John' } })
```

Both of the above will return `<h1>Hello John</h1>`. The template string cannot contain any logic due to [multiple reasons](#no-logic).


#### riot.render(template, data, true)

Same as `riot.render(template, data)` but all strings on the `data` are escaped as follows:

- `&` becomes `&amp;`
- `"` becomes `&quot;`
- `<` becomes `&lt;`
- `>` becomes `&gt;`

This prevents any XSS exploits on the data. Use this method if the data is provided by the end users or you don't oterwise have control over the data. The drawback is that this method is about 15 times slower than the above non-escaping counterpart.


``` javascript
// returns: "<h1>Hello &lt;freak&gt;</h1>"
riot.render("<h1>Hello {username}</h1>", { username: '<freak>' })
```


#### riot.render(template, data, fn)

Provide a custom function to transform the given `data`. For example:

``` javascript
// @- characters not allowed on username
riot.render("<h1>Hello {username}</h1>", { username: '@lolly' }, function(str, key) {
  if (key == 'username') return str.replace("@", "")
})
```


### Routing

#### riot.route(to)

Changes the browser URL and notifies all the listeners assigned with `riot.route(callback)` method below.

``` javascript
riot.route("#!/customers")
```

#### riot.route(callback)

Execute the given `callback` when the URL changes (via back button) or when `riot.route(to)` is called. The function is also called once upon page load – Riot makes sure this happens consistenly across browsers.

``` javascript
riot.route(function(hash) {
  // hash is a shortcut to location.hash
})
```

See how routing is [implemented](https://github.com/riot/riot
`script`-admin/blob/master/src/ui/view-switch.js) on our [demo application](../demo/).

Back button is supported on browsers with [history.pushState](http://caniuse.com/#feat=history) support. This includes all browsers except IE9 and below. On IE9 the feature falls back nicely and back button simply goes to previous page ignoring the changes on `location.hash`.


## Extensions

In the above example the `backend.call()` method returns a promise interface that is created with following `riot.observable` trick:

``` javascript
function Promise(fn) {
  var self = riot.observable(this)

  $.each(['done', 'fail', 'always'], function(i, name) {
    self[name] = function(arg) {
      return self[$.isFunction(arg) ? 'on' : 'trigger'](name, arg)
    }

  })

}
```

This is a generic observable implementation that you can take advantage of in any JavaScript application, not just in MVP configurations.

There is no specific extension mechanism in Riot. I think simple copy/pasteable functions are the best reusable components in JavaScript world. Riot itself is just 3 functions. They all extend the `$` namespace since it already exists on most websites (created on demand if it doesn't exist) and it's not cool to set global variables.

There is an unfortunate tendency to build unnecessary boilerplate around simple functionality (options, repositories, build systems etc...) while it could all be expressed with just one function. Simple functions are usable anywhere.

I'd love to see something like Gist but with better discoverability (search, tags etc.) A big mass of reusable functions that you can paste to your own project, perhaps modifying them to your needs a bit. Someone do that for us, please!


## Conclusion

Riot applications are smaller and they are written with vanilla JavaScript and jQuery. The business logic is completely separated and it has a nice API. All the functionality around the API is on isolated modules that can be developed independently. The API can be run and tested on the server side, and the application is fast because of the simple architecture and the logic free templating.

All the above concepts are applied on a well documented [demo application](../demo/). It's an administration panel that you can use as a starting point.

This documentation was a high level introduction to modular JavaScript programming but this is an ongoing process. The next update will add more detailed sections about Riot API, testing, building and deploying.


## Links

[1] [MVP passive view](http://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/PassiveScreen.html)

[2] [Riot templating is Fast](https://muut.com//blog/technology/riotjs-the-1kb-mvp-framework.html#fast)

[3] jQuery API implementations: [Zepto](http://zeptojs.com/), [Minified.js](http://minifiedjs.com/)

[4] [Usage statistics and marketshare of JQuery for websites](http://w3techs.com/technologies/details/js-jquery/all/all)

