---
layout: default
title: Migration from riot 2
---

{% include guide-tabs.html %}

## General info

Riot 3 is a big improvement over the previous release, please check [release notes](/release-notes) for details.

We have resolved many problems and they required a major release bump because they couldn't be fixed with the previous codebase.
Migration from Riot 2 shouldn't be very difficult. Refer to the list of breaking changes below.

## Breaking changes

### `riot-tag` attribute renamed to `data-is`

```html
<!-- not supported -->
<div riot-tag="my-tag"></div>

<!-- good -->
<div data-is="my-tag"></div>
```

Notice that `data-is` can also be used in nested tags and supports dynamic expressions:

```html
<my-tag>
  <div data-is={ subComponent }></div>

  <script>
    this.subComponent = 'child-tag'
  </script>
</my-tag>
```

### `name` and `id` attributes no longer create references to DOM nodes

The `name` and `id` attributes are no longer used by riot to cache DOM references to the tag context or add custom tag references to `this.tags`. Use the `ref` attribute instead to get references to DOM nodes or custom tags.

<span class="tag red">Warning:</span> the `refs` object is __only populated__ after the `mount` event.

```html
<my-tag>
  <p ref="paragraph">Hello</p>
  <sub-tag ref="childtag"></sub-tag>
  <script>
    this.on('mount', function() {
      console.log(this.refs.paragraph) // => p node
      console.log(this.refs.childtag) // => sub-tag tag
    })
  </script>
</my-tag>
```

### Changed object loop syntax

Object loops now use a different syntax, before we used `key, value in object`, and now we switched to `value, key in object`
[related issue](https://github.com/riot/riot/issues/1420)

### `riot.route` removed from riot core

`riot.route` was removed from riot core to decrease the bundle size in case you choose a different routing library. [`riot-route`](https://github.com/riot/route) is still maintained and can be used with riot or standalone.

### No `update` and `updated` events triggered before the `mount` event

Previously riot was firing `update` and `updated` events even before the `mount` event was triggered.
Now you can use `before-mount` and `mount` to mount your tags properly, the `update` and the `updated` events will only be fired on consequent update calls.

### Removed automatic `preventDefault`

Riot 2 was automatically calling `event.preventDefault()` on any tag event, we thought this behavior was wrong and we decided to remove it.

```html
<my-tag>
  <form onsubmit={ ajaxSubmit }>
    <input>
  </form>

  <script>
    ajaxSubmit(event) {
      // in riot2 this was not needed
      event.preventDefault()
    }
  </script>
</my-tag>
```

### No more parent tag updates on events generated by custom children tags

In riot 2 events generated by custom children tags in loops were triggering an update on the parent as well [riot/1319](https://github.com/riot/riot/issues/1319). In riot 3 if you need to update the parent from a custom looped child tag you will need to do it explicitly.

### Removed support for spaced events in `riot.observable`

We made riot.observable 6x times faster than the previous release, but to achieve this performance we had to remove spaced events support. Listening to `*` is still supported.

```js
var el = riot.observable()

// not supported
el.on('start stop', function() { /* */ })
el.trigger('start stop')

// use this instead
function cb() {}
el
  .on('start', cb)
  .on('stop', cb)

el
  .trigger('start')
  .trigger('stop')
```

### jQuery DOM events

Previously you could trigger riot event handlers via jQuery using `$('.my-element').trigger('click')`. Riot 2 was using the [old DOM events model ( level 2 )](https://www.w3.org/TR/DOM-Level-2-Events/), with riot 3 we have upgraded the riot internal events handlers to the more standard [new DOM events model level 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/DOM-Level-3-Events/) that is not supported by the jQuery DOM events API. This means that if you need alternative solutions to the simulate fake events [more info](https://github.com/riot/riot/issues/2150#issuecomment-271334951).

### Scoped css by default

In riot 3 all css rules declared inside a tag's `<style>` element are scoped by default and you will no longer need the `scoped` attribute. There is no option to disable this behavior at the moment.

### Deprecated `babel` 5.8

Now the `es6` parser will use the latest `babel` version [more info](/guide/compiler/#ecmascript-6). You can still manually configure your `es6` parser to use the old babel releases. Note that we also support `bublé` as an alternative to babel.

### Template errors are no longer silently swallowed

In riot 2 a handler function had to be manually configured to catch errors in tag templates. In riot 3 all template errors
are output using `console.error` if the `console` api is available. This is not really a breaking change, because a custom `riot.util.tmpl.errorHandler` will still work.

### All `value` attributes using expressions will be output as `riot-value` ([riot/1957](https://github.com/riot/riot/issues/1957))

```html
<my-tag>
  <!-- The value attribute will be compiled to riot-value in riot 3. -->
  <input-wrapper value={total} />
  <script>
    this.total = '$11'
  </script>
</my-tag>

<input-wrapper>
  <script>
    // riot3
    console.log(opts.riotValue)
    // riot2
    console.log(opts.value)
  </script>
</input-wrapper>
```
